Operator docs (#2331)
datawire/ambassador: docs/user-guide/aes-operator.md

# The Ambassador Edge Stack Operator

The Ambassador Edge Stack Operator is a Kubernetes Operator that controls the
complete lifecycle of your Ambassador installation in your cluster. It also
automates many of the repeatable tasks you have to perform for the Ambassador
Edge Stack. Once installed, the AES Operator will automatically complete rapid
installations, seamless upgrades to new versions of Ambassador, Azure

> integrations, and provides a reference architecture for ease of use. [Read more](https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator/blob/master/README.md#version-syntax).

Reviewer: What do you mean by "Azure integrations" here? Also, the reference architecture isn't specific to the operator, it's specific to Azure...

Author: resolved

3. To install the Ambassador Operator CRD in a different namespace, you can specify it in `NS` and then run the following command:

    ```shell
    $ NS="custom-namespace"
    $ curl -L https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator/releases/download/latest/ambassador-operator.yaml | \
        sed -e "s/namespace: ambassador/namespace: $NS/g" | \
        kubectl apply -n $NS -f -
    ```

Then, create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema and apply it to the AES Operator.

1. To create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema, use the following YAML as your guideline: [https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr](https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr).
2. Save that file as `amb-install.yaml`
3. Edit the `amb-install.yaml` and optionally complete configurations such as Version constraint or UpdateWindow:
4. Finally, apply your `AmbassadorInstallation` CRD to the AES Operator schema
   with the following command: `kubectl apply -n ambassador -f amb-install.yaml`

### Configuration for the Ambassador Edge Stack

> After the initial installation of Ambassador, the Operator will check for updates every 24 hours and delay the update until the Update Window allow the update to proceed. It will use the Version Syntax for determining if any new release is acceptable. When a new release is available and acceptable, the Operator will upgrade the Ambassador installation.

Reviewer: Does it install Ambassador (OSS) or The Ambassador Edge Stack? We should check for consistency regarding "Ambassador" vs. "The Ambassador Edge Stack" throughout here.

Reviewer 2: I would just say Ambassador...

      * any incremental and bug fix versions 4.* and 4
      * the most recent 4.* EA release (i.e., if 4.0.5 is the last GA version and
        there is a 4.1-EA3, then this selects 4.1-EA3 over the 4.0.5 GA).

Read more about SemVer [here](https://github.com/Masterminds/semver#basic-comparisons).

`updateWindow` is an optional item that will control when the updates can take
place. This is used to force system updates to happen late at night if that’s
what the sysadmins want.

There can be any number of `updateWindow` entries (separated by commas).
Never turns off automatic updates even if there are other entries in the
comma-separated list. Never is used by sysadmins to disable all updates during
blackout periods by doing a `kubectl` apply or using our Edge Policy Console to
set this.

Each `updateWindow` is in crontab format (see https://crontab.guru/) Some
examples of `updateWindow` are:

* `0-6 * * * SUN`: every Sunday, from 0am to 6am
* `5 1 * * *`: every first day of the month, at 5am

The Operator cannot guarantee minute time granularity, so specifying a minute in the crontab expression can lead to some updates happening sooner/later than expected.

> ### Install via Helm Chart

Reviewer 2: I would move this section to the "install the operator" section, because it is just another way of installing it

**To do so:**

1. Add the Helm repository to your Helm client with `helm repo add datawire https://getambassador.io`
2. Run the following command: `helm install datawire/ambassador-operator`
3. Once the new Operator is working, create a new CRD called `AmbassadorInstallation` based on the following YAML:

    ```yaml
    $ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -n ambassador -f -
    apiVersion: getambassador.io/v2
    kind: AmbassadorInstallation
    metadata:
      name: ambassador
    spec:
      version: 1.1.0
    EOF
    ```

## Configuration

After the AmbassadorInstallation is created for the first time, the Operator will then use the list of releases available for the Ambassador Helm Chart for determining the most recent version that can be installed, using the optional Version Syntax for filtering the releases that are acceptable. It will then install Ambassador, using any extra arguments provided in the `AmbassadorInstallation`, like the `baseImage`, the `logLevel` or any of the helmValues.

For example:

```yaml
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -n ambassador -f -
apiVersion: getambassador.io/v2
kind: AmbassadorInstallation
metadata:
  name: ambassador
spec:

>   version: 1.1.0

Reviewer: Should the example here reference 1.2.0 instead?

Author: done

set this.

Each `updateWindow` is in crontab format (see https://crontab.guru/) Some
examples of `updateWindow` are:

* `0-6 * * * SUN`: every Sunday, from 0am to 6am
* `5 1 * * *`: every first day of the month, at 5am

The Operator cannot guarantee minute time granularity, so specifying a minute in the crontab expression can lead to some updates happening sooner/later than expected.

## Install via Helm Chart

You can also install the AES Operator from a Helm Chart. The following Helm values are supported:

* `image.name`: Operator image name
* `image.pullPolicy`: Operator image pull policy
* `namespace`: namespace in which to install the Operator

**To do so:**

1. Add the Helm repository to your Helm client with `helm repo add datawire https://getambassador.io`
2. Run the following command: `helm install datawire/ambassador-operator`
3. Once the new Operator is working, create a new CRD called `AmbassadorInstallation` based on the following YAML:

    ```yaml
    $ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -n ambassador -f -
    apiVersion: getambassador.io/v2
    kind: AmbassadorInstallation
    metadata:
      name: ambassador
    spec:
      version: 1.2.0
    EOF
    ```

> ## Operator Configuration

Reviewer 2: I think that this section does  not really describe the configuration (that is really described after line 43) but the "life time" of the operator, what it does... maybe some other title?

# The Ambassador Edge Stack Operator

The Ambassador Edge Stack Operator is a Kubernetes Operator that controls the
complete lifecycle of Ambassador in your cluster. It also
automates many of the repeatable tasks you have to perform for the Ambassador
Edge Stack. Once installed, the AES Operator will automatically complete rapid
installations and seamless upgrades to new versions of Ambassador.  [Read
more](https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator/blob/master/README.md#version-syntax)
about the benefits of the Operator.

> A Kubernetes operator is a software extension that makes it easier to manage and automate your Kubernetes-based applications, in the spirit of a human operator. Operators complete actions such as deploying, upgrading and maintaining applications. and many others. Read more about Kubernetes Operators [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/).

Reviewer: Comma instead (, and many others)?

3. To install the Ambassador Operator CRD in a different namespace, you can specify it in `NS` and then run the following command:

    ```shell
    $ NS="custom-namespace"
    $ curl -L https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator/releases/download/latest/ambassador-operator.yaml | \
        sed -e "s/namespace: ambassador/namespace: $NS/g" | \
        kubectl apply -n $NS -f -
    ```

Then, create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema and apply it to the AES Operator.

1. To create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema, use the following YAML as your guideline: [https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr](https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr).
2. Save that file as `amb-install.yaml`
3. Edit the `amb-install.yaml` and optionally complete configurations such as Version constraint or UpdateWindow:
4. Finally, apply your `AmbassadorInstallation` CRD to the AES Operator schema
   with the following command: `kubectl apply -n ambassador -f amb-install.yaml`

### Configuration for the Ambassador Edge Stack

> After the initial installation of Ambassador, the Operator will check for updates every 24 hours and delay the update until the Update Window allow the update to proceed. It will use the Version Syntax for determining if any new release is acceptable. When a new release is available and acceptable, the Operator will upgrade Ambassador.

Reviewer: allows the update to proceed

### Version Syntax and Update Window

To specify version numbers, use SemVer for the version number for any level of
precision. This can optionally end in `*`.  For example:

  * `1.0` = exactly version 1.0
  * `1.1` = exactly version 1.1
  * `1.1.*` = version 1.1 and any bug fix versions 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, etc.
  * `2.*` = version 2.0 and any incremental and bug fix versions 2.0, 2.0.1, 2.0.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.2.1, etc.
  * `*` = all versions.
  * `3.0-ea` = version 3.0-ea1 and any subsequent EA releases on 3.0. Also selects the final 3.0 once the final GA version is released.
  * `4.*-ea` = version 4.0-ea1 and any subsequent EA release on 4.0. This also selects:
      * the final GA 4.0.
      * any incremental and bug fix versions 4.* and 4
      * the most recent 4.* EA release (i.e., if 4.0.5 is the last GA version and
        there is a 4.1-EA3, then this selects 4.1-EA3 over the 4.0.5 GA).

Read more about SemVer [here](https://github.com/Masterminds/semver#basic-comparisons).

`updateWindow` is an optional item that will control when the updates can take
place. This is used to force system updates to happen late at night if that’s

> what the sysadmins want.

Reviewer: late at night, for example, is that's what sysadmins want

There can be any number of `updateWindow` entries (separated by commas).

> Never turns off automatic updates even if there are other entries in the

Reviewer: A value of `Never` turns off...

This document covers the following for the Operator:
* Configuration
* Installation
* Troubleshooting

## Operator Configuration

You can configure the Operator to best fit your environment:

1. Automatic updates for Helm
2. Automatic updates for Ambassador
3. Custom configurations

### Helm Updates via Operator

After the AmbassadorInstallation is created for the first time, the Operator will then use the list of releases available for the Ambassador Helm Chart for determining the most recent version that can be installed, using the optional Version Syntax for filtering the releases that are acceptable. It will then install Ambassador, using any extra arguments provided in the `AmbassadorInstallation`, like the `baseImage`, the `logLevel` or any of the helmValues.

For example:

```shell
$ cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -n ambassador -f -
apiVersion: getambassador.io/v2
kind: AmbassadorInstallation
metadata:
  name: ambassador
spec:
  version: 1.1.0
EOF
```

> After applying a CR like this in a new cluster, the Operator will install immediately a new instance of Ambassador 1.1.0 in the `ambassador` namespace. Removing this AmbassadorInstallation will uninstall in this namespace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After applying an AmbassadorInstallation customer resource like this in a new cluster, the Operator will install a new instance of Ambassador 1.1.0 in the `ambassador` namespace, immediately. Removing this AmbassadorInstallation will uninstall Ambassador from this namespace.
```

3. To install the Ambassador Operator CRD in a different namespace, you can specify it in `NS` and then run the following command:

```shell
$ NS="custom-namespace"
$ curl -L https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator/releases/download/latest/ambassador-operator.yaml | \
    sed -e "s/namespace: ambassador/namespace: $NS/g" | \
    kubectl apply -n $NS -f -
```

Then, create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema and apply it to the AES Operator.

1. To create the `AmbassadorInstallation` Custom Resource schema, use the following YAML as your guideline: [https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr](https://github.com/datawire/ambassador-operator#the-operator-custom-resource-cr).
2. Save that file as `amb-install.yaml`
3. Edit the `amb-install.yaml` and optionally complete configurations such as Version constraint or UpdateWindow:
4. Finally, apply your `AmbassadorInstallation` CRD to the AES Operator schema with the following command: `kubectl apply -n ambassador -f amb-install.yaml`

> ### Install via OperatorHub.io

Reviewer 3: need to remove this section as this is scheduled for next cycle

Author: removed

You can install the AES Operator from the Operator Hub, where makers of Kubernetes operators can share their configurations with the community.

**To install from this site:**

1. Navigate to  operatorhub.io and search for “Ambassador Edge Stack.”
2. Click on the tile.
3. Click the **Install** button and follow the directions to finish the installation.
4. Once the new Operator is working, create a new CRD called
   `AmbassadorInstallation` based on the following YAML:

> ### Install via Helm Chart

Reviewer 3: ```
- The following Helm values are supported:
  - image.name: operator image name
  - image.pullPolicy: operator image pull policy
  - namespace: namespace to install the operator in
```

Author: added

You can also install the AES Operator from a Helm Chart.

**To do so:**

1. Add the Helm repository to your Helm client with `helm repo add datawire https://getambassador.io`

> 2. Run the following command: `$ helm install stable/ambassador-operator`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Run the following command: `$ helm install datawire/ambassador-operator`
```
